FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT: I,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt--
CALVIN COOLIDGE: I,
Calvin Coolidge--
LYNDON JOHNSON: I,
Lyndon Baines Johnson--
- --do solemnly swear--
JOHN F. KENNEDY:
--do solemnly swear--
GERALD FORD: --that I
will faithfully execute--
RONALD REAGAN: --the Office of
President of the United States.
- It's this moment--
GEORGE BUSH: --and will,
to the best of my ability--
BILL CLINTON: --to the
best of my ability--
- --it's these words--
JOHN F. KENNEDY: --preserve--
JIMMY CARTER: --protect--
RICHARD NIXON: --and defend--
- --once spoken--
GEORGE W. BUSH:
--the Constitution
of the United States.
- --that have the
power to transform
any citizen into a president.
JOHN F. KENNEDY:
So help me, God.
FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT:
BARACK OBAMA: So help me, God.
- Congratulations,
Mr. President.
- So don't mess it up.
JOHN ROBERTS: That
I will execute
the office of President of
the United States faithfully.
BARACK OBAMA: That
I will execute--
JOHN ROBERTS:
--the-- faithfully,
the President-- the Office of
President of the United States.
BARACK OBAMA: --the Office
of President of the United
States faithfully.
- --the Office of the
Presidency of the United States.
- Whoopsie.
- --maintain and defend--
BARACK OBAMA: --the Office of
President of the United States.
- Uh-oh.
- I'm ready to
administer the oath.
- To tell the story of the
presidential oath of office,
let's start at the
beginning with this guy,
the old $1 bill himself,
George Washington,
or the next best thing.
As our nation's
first president, he
was the first to recite the
oath back on April 30, 1789.
GEORGE WASHINGTON: I,
George Washington--
- --do solemnly swear--
GEORGE WASHINGTON:
--do solemnly swear--
- The oath of office is
written into the United States
Constitution, and it's
the only part meant to be
administered word for word.
FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT: --preserve,
protect, and defend--
- The framers carefully
added these specific 35
words as the binding
pledge a new president
makes to the country.
JOHN F. KENNEDY: And
I will faithfully
execute the Office of
President of the United States.
- And Washington
was the first person
ever to get a crack at it.
GEORGE WASHINGTON: And I will,
to the best of my ability--
- He took the oath at Federal
Hall in New York City.
But these days, most presidents
take it outside the US Capitol.
- --the Office of President
of the United States.
GEORGE BUSH: --the Office of
President of the United States.
- The Constitution doesn't say
who has to administer the oath,
but generally, it's
the Chief Justice.
- --the Constitution
of the United States.
- It was Washington's
idea to kiss the Bible,
and almost every president
after him did the same, that is,
until the Dwight Eisenhower
decided enough of that.
He put the tradition to rest in
1953 and said a prayer instead.
DWIGHT EISENHOWER: --that Thou
will make full and complete.
GEORGE WASHINGTON:
--so help me, God.
- Now that line
is up for debate.
The words "so help
me, God" are not
written in the Constitution.
And historians are not
sure whether Washington
was the first to say them,
but most presidents have added
them to the end of their oath.
RICHARD NIXON:
--so help me, God.
- Fast forward two
centuries later,
the oath remains a very sacred
tradition in our country.
- --preserve,
protect, and defend--
JIMMY CARTER: --the Constitution
of the United States--
RONALD REAGAN:
--so help me, God.
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY: This
is the grand theater
and the grand spectacle of
watching a democracy at work,
where an entire government
hands over a baton
to the next government.
It does not happen until the
words of the oath are uttered.
FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT: --that
I will faithfully execute--
BILL CLINTON: --the Office of
President of the United States.
RICHARD NIXON: --preserve,
protect, and defend.
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY:
And the words matter.
You have to say the
words correctly.
And if it goes sideways, you're
going to have to do a do-over
like Barack Obama did.
- Yep, Barack Obama
had a redo in 2009.
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY:
The oath of office
went sideways,
largely for Supreme
Court Justice Roberts' mistake.
JOHN ROBERTS: Are you prepared
to take the oath, Senator?
BARACK OBAMA: I am.
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY: President
Obama started taking the oath,
but Justice Roberts' language
was different than what
Obama was thinking.
JOHN ROBERTS: --swear--
BARACK OBAMA: I, Barack Hussein
Obama, do solemnly swear--
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY: They were kind
of counterposing each other.
And they would go
back and forth.
And it was an awkward moment.
JOHN ROBERTS: --the
United States faithfully--
BARACK OBAMA: --and
I will execute--
JOHN ROBERTS: --the--
faithfully the President--
the Office of President
of the United States--
BARACK OBAMA: --the Office
of President of the United
States faithfully.
DOUGLAS BRINKLEY:
Immediately, people
called it a botched oath.
Some people even
questioned, is President
Obama a real president?
JEFFREY TOOBIN:
The next morning,
a new Justice
Department official
named David Barron called the
White House counsel and said,
you know, we might want to
think about doing this again.
And that's what set in motion
the redo later that day.
I would describe the
atmosphere in the White House
as kind of sheepish.
Everyone was kind of embarrassed
to have to do this again.
- Four years later, he
took it two more times,
but that's because in 2013,
January 20 landed on a Sunday.
When that happens,
the president-elect
takes the oath privately in the
White House and then publicly
the next day.
SASHA OBAMA: Good job, Daddy.
BARACK OBAMA: I did it.
SASHA OBAMA: You didn't mess up.
- Yeah, Dad, good job.
Can I call you Dad?
BARACK OBAMA: Thank
you, everybody.
- In all, Obama has taken
the oath four times.
The only other president to
take the oath that many times is
FDR, but that's
only because he was
elected president four times.
A little different.
Of course, Obama isn't
the only president
whose swearing-in ceremony
has been a little bit weird.
For example, it
didn't go so smoothly
for President Truman in 1945.
- Vice President Harry S.
Truman take the oath of office
as 32nd president.
- There's no audio of it,
but when Harry S. Truman took
the oath, Chief Justice
Harlan Stone said,
I, Harry Ship Truman.
But Stone made that up.
Truman's middle name
was just the letter S.
WILLIAM HOWARD
TAFT: --faithfully
execute the Office of the
President of the United States.
- It also wasn't perfect
for Herbert Hoover in 1929.
WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT: --to
the best of your ability
that you will preserve,
maintain, and defend.
- It's subtle, but did
you pick up on that?
Chief Justice William Howard
Taft said maintain instead of
protect the Constitution.
WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT:
--the Constitution
of the United States.
- In 1909, when Taft
himself was sworn in,
his oath was also misquoted.
JOHN ROBERTS: --and will,
to the best of my ability--
BARACK OBAMA: --and will,
- While those earlier
administrations
played a little fast
and loose with the oath,
Obama's camp felt differently,
because of, well, you know.
(WHISPERING) I'm
not going to say it.
JEFFREY TOOBIN:
Obama himself had
nothing to do with the
decision to redo the oath.
It was the people around him.
His aides, who knew that
politically as much as legally,
it was very important to
establish his legitimacy.
They knew he was the
first African-American.
They knew these false
questions had been
raised about his birthplace.
So they decided, let's
foreclose any controversy
and redo the whole thing.
- Maybe we should just go back
to the way they administered
the oath in the 1800s.
BEN ZIMMER: Originally, whoever
was administering the oath
would ask it as a question.
Do you, such and
such, solemnly swear?
And then the person would
respond just by saying, I do,
or I do solemnly swear.
HERBERT HOOVER: I do.
BEN ZIMMER: In
more modern times,
the new president actually
repeats every single word.
- --that I will
faithfully execute--
JIMMY CARTER: --that I
will faithfully execute--
BEN ZIMMER: The
whole idea of taking
an oath to assume a new office
goes back to ancient times.
HARRY TRUMAN: I, Harry S.
Truman, do solemnly swear--
- The presidential
oath is shorter
than other official oath.
It's shorter than--
- --to have and to hold--
- --most wedding vows--
- --and in health--
- --perform no operation for--
- --shorter than the
Hippocratic Oath.
- On my honor, I
will do my best--
- Even the Boy Scouts
have a longer oath.
The Boy Scouts.
It takes more words
to promise to get
an old lady safely
across the street
than it does to get
the nuclear codes.
- --mentally awake
and morally straight.
- But how much do Americans
know about the oath of office?
We decided to test
a few to find out.
And since we like our
tests with chicken wings,
we headed to the
Founding Fathers
bar in Buffalo, New York.
- Welcome to Founding Fathers.
We're going to be
taking the CNN Oath
of Office Trivia Challenge.
Are we ready?
- Not really.
- All right.
Who was the only president
to take the oath of office
from a female official?
- Uh, Bill Clinton?
He was good with the ladies.
- LBJ.
It was federal judge
Sarah Hughes aboard Air
Force One in Dallas, Texas.
- Oh, my god.
I totally didn't know that.
- Which president
and what year was
the first oath of office to
take place in Washington, DC?
- 1492.
1776.
My mom's birthday.
- Jefferson, right here.
1801.
- This guy's going
too fast, right?
- Who was the first
president to affirm rather
than swear the oath of office?
- What's the difference?
Those are synonyms!
- Pierce!
Franklin Pierce!
We have a winner!
- Pierce?
That's a president?
Here's another piece of trivia.
When Donald Trump takes the
oath of office this year,
he'll be the first
president since Eisenhower
to be sworn in without
any political experience.
What won't be different
is all the fanfare,
including "The President's
Own" United States Marine Band.
[music playing]
Hey, how can I
get a Marine band?
JASON K. FETTIG: We
think we've played
for every presidential
inauguration
since 1801, since
Thomas Jefferson.
Music is actually central
to the inaugural ceremony.
It really is the
thing that glues
the entire ceremony together.
And when we come to the part
of the presidential oath,
the music really is the
thing that, I think,
seals the deal for the new
President of the United States.
- [humming] I feel more
presidential right now.
JASON K. FETTIG: Immediately
following the oath,
we play "Four Ruffles
and Flourishes."
[MUSIC - "FOUR RUFFLES AND
FLOURISHES"]
And then we play
"Hail to the Chief,"
which is official honors for the
President of the United States.
[music - "hail to the chief"]
- These guys are good.
JASON K. FETTIG: And this is
the first time the new president
hears "Hail to the Chief."
[music - "hail to the chief"]
When we have an inauguration
where the new president
is not the incumbent,
we actually
play "Hail to the Chief" twice.
We will play "Hail to
the Chief" for President
Obama for the very last
time in his administration.
And then when President
Trump is sworn in,
we will play "Hail to the
Chief" for the very first
time for the new president.
The oath and the music
brings the entire ceremony
to its zenith.
[music playing]
- Sure, it may seem like a
lot of pomp and circumstance,
but in the end.
It is so much bigger than that.
Because even when
all the fanfare
is stripped away,
even in a simple home
like Chester Arthur--
LYNDON JOHNSON: --will to
the best of my ability--
- --on-board a plane in a time
of crisis like Lyndon Johnson,
even behind closed
doors at the White House
to make up for a mistake--
BARACK OBAMA: --I will
to the best of my--
- --it really is
all about the oath.
35 words with the power
to make a president,
and hopefully,
unite the country.